spec/DIDConnect.md, before:

# OpenID Connect Profile for self-sovereign identity (DIDConnect)

## Copyright information

Copyright (c) 2021 everis and its authors.

This document is made available under the terms of the [CC BY 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) license, meaning you are free to share it and build upon it as long as you give proper attribution.

## Introduction

This document describes a method, nicknamed "DID Connect", to authenticate a user against their [Decentralized Identifier (DID)](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/). This method uses [OpenID Connect (OIDC)](https://openid.net/developers/specs/), which itself builds upon the [OAuth 2.0 framework](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6749).

The objective of DID Connect is to extend OIDC in a way that makes it as resource-owner-centric as possible, to enable Self-Sovereign Identity (SSI) scenarios. That decentralization makes DID Connect different from traditional provider-centric OIDC flows in a few aspects, as detailed below.

| Aspect                    | Provider-Centric Identity          | Self-Sovereign Identity
| ------------------------- | ------------------------- | -----------------------
| Subject ID (`sub`)               | IdP-assigned.         | User's DID.
| Client registration flow  | Client registers against IdP (must be authorized by IdP).           | No authorization needed by a central entity for acting as a client. Authorization is whatever set of Verifiable Credentials the client is able to present.
| Client information        | Held and shown by IdP.       | Verifiable Presentation, containing Verifiable Credentials issued by any relevant authorities.
| Client ID                 | IdP-assigned. | URL of the Verifiable Presentation.
| Authorization Server      | Identity Provider (IdP), known by the Relying Party before creating the request.   | Chosen by user during authentication. Examples: user's own identity wallet, or a web application.
| Authorization endpoint    | Contains the Identity Provider (IdP)'s hostname. Either static or discovered through OIDC Discovery. | Custom scheme (`didconnect:`).
| Token endpoint (when applicable)           | Contains the Identity Provider (IdP)'s hostname. Either static or discovered through OIDC Discovery. | Provided as `token_uri` parameter in the authorization response. (**WIP**.)
| Userinfo endpoint           | Managed by IdP. Either static or discovered through OIDC Discovery.   | Contained in `id_token` (`userinfo` claim).
| Public key for id_token's signature by client | Either static or discovered through OIDC Discovery. | Listed in DID Document (DDO).
| Client's whitelisted redirect_uri endpoints | Registered and checked by the IdP. | Announced as a claim in the Client ID's Verifiable Presentation.
| Supported flows | Either static or discovered through OIDC Discovery. | Negotiated during authentication (**WIP**).

## General flow

The OIDC specification defines the following general flow:

1. Client registers (once).
2. Client presents an authentication request in the form of a URL pointing to the Authorization Server (AS).
3. AS authenticates the Resource Owner (for example, if the AS is a mobile app, the user should unlock the app) and asks for consent.
4. Depending on the value of `response_type`, AS generates a combination of identity token, grant code, and/or access token, then provides them to the client's `redirect_uri` contained in the request, following the `response_mode` parameter (form, post or fragment).
5. The client receives the tokens and/or code.
6. *Authorization flow only.* Client gets the URL of the token endpoint and uses it to request the `id_token` and/or `access_token`.
7. Client checks the signature of `id_token` as a JWT and reads user's identity from the token.
8. If a `userinfo` claim is available in `id_token` and an `access_token` was provided, client queries that endpoint, using the access token for authentication.

Specificities on how those steps are to be applied for DIDConnect are detailed in the following sections.

### 1. Client registration

1. Relying Party obtains a DID.
2. RP obtains Verifiable Credentials whose subject is the RP's DID, and issued by entities trusted by the targeted users. How users should trust the RP's DID and/or credentials is outside the scope of this specification. The credentials should typically claim information about the RP, such as the application's name, originating organization, logo, website, etc, but the semantics of such claims is also outside the scope of this specification.
3. RP obtains a Verifiable Credential whose subject is the RP's DID, and containing the claim `redirect_uri` with the value of whitelisted callback URL(s). Like the previous point, how the AS should trust that credential is not defined in this document. However, it is recommended that the credential is self-issued, i.e. the issuer is also the RP's DID.
4. RP creates a Verifiable Presentation containing those credentials, and whose holder is the RP's DID.
5. The Verifiable Presentation is available at a location where users will be able to access it. The RP's Client ID is the presentation's URL.

### 2. Authentication request

An authentication request is a URL of the following form: `didconnect://auth?...` with the same query parameters as defined in the OIDC specification. The value of `client_id` is the one obtained during registration.

### 3. Obtaining user consent from AS

When a user's Authorization Server receives a request from the application's client_id, it must treat `client_id` as an URL and fetch the Verifiable Presentation (VP) from it. Then, the AS must check the following conditions:

- The VP's proof is valid.
- The VP is within validity date.
- The `redirect_uri` value from the authentication request matches one of the values present in the VP's _valid credentials_.

Then, the AS should ask for user's consent after displaying all relevant claims, based on _valid credentials_.

Note: For `redirect_uri` and displayed claims, **_valid credentials_** are credentials with a valid proof, that are within validity dates, and whose subject ID is the same as the VP's holder.

### 4. Token generation

See OpenID Connect specification. The token must be signed with a key that is listed in the DID document of the subject's DID.

### 5. Getting the tokens and/or authorization code

See OpenID Connect specification.

### 6. Accessing the tokens (if applicable)

See OpenID Connect specification. Token endpoint URI is taken from the `token_uri` parameter contained in the response.

### 7. Verification of user's identity

The RP's endpoint listening on `redirect_uri` receives the same data as defined in OIDC specification.

The JWT contained in the `id_token` is the same as defined in the OIDC specification, with the following differences:

| Parameter | Meaning in DID Connect
|-----------|-----------------------
| `sub`     | The user's DID.
| `iss`| The identifier (resolved from the DID Document) of the public key that is signing the JWT. The key must be valid for that DID and the JWT must be signed by that key.
| `userinfo` | The URL of the Resource Server where a user's Verifiable Presentation is available.

The Relying Party must verify that:

- The key identified in `iss` is an authorized key of the DID value in `sub`, by looking at the DID Document.
- The JWT is signed by that key.

### 8. Accessing the user's protected resources (when applicable)

If an access token was provided, the client can access user's information by querying the URL referenced as `userinfo` in the id_token, and provide the access token as an `Authorization` header, as described in [OpenID Connect specification](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#UserInfoRequest).

The response is a Verifiable Presentation. The presentation must be valid (proof-wise), within validity dates, and the presentation's holder must be the user's authenticated DID.

## Registration of custom scheme by Authorization Server applications

This specification describes the use of a custom URI scheme to express authorization requests, very much like the use of `mailto:` or `tel:` URI schemes. This makes it possible for any registered application on the user agent to handle requests after registering itself for the `didconnect:` custom scheme on the RO's operating system.

Below are examples of Authorization Servers.

| AS implementation | Custom scheme registration |
|--|--|
| Mobile or desktop application | Specific to the operating system |
| Web application | Using `registerProtocolHandler()` on the web browser |

## Current limitations

See ["must address" issues](https://github.com/KayTrust/did-connect/labels/must%20address).

Commit message:

Move didconnect scheme to its own section
Make the specification two-layered:
- The generic part doesn't care about a new scheme and just introduces a `did` scope and a JWT structure.
- The didconnect scheme part defines the behaviour for BYOAS.

spec/DIDConnect.md, after:

# OpenID Connect Profile for self-sovereign identity (DIDConnect)

## Copyright information

Copyright (c) 2021 everis and its authors.

This document is made available under the terms of the [CC BY 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) license, meaning you are free to share it and build upon it as long as you give proper attribution.

## Introduction

This document describes a method, nicknamed "DID Connect", to authenticate a user against their [Decentralized Identifier (DID)](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/). This method uses [OpenID Connect (OIDC)](https://openid.net/developers/specs/), which itself builds upon the [OAuth 2.0 framework](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6749).

The objective of DID Connect is to extend OIDC in a way that makes it as resource-owner-centric as possible, to enable Self-Sovereign Identity (SSI) scenarios. That decentralization makes DID Connect different from traditional provider-centric OIDC flows in a few aspects, as detailed below.

| Aspect                    | Provider-Centric Identity          | Self-Sovereign Identity
| ------------------------- | ------------------------- | -----------------------
| Subject ID (`sub`)        | IdP-assigned.             | User's DID.
| Client registration       | Client registers against IdP (must be authorized by IdP).           | No authorization needed by a central entity for acting as a client. Authorization is whatever set of Verifiable Credentials the client is able to present.
| Client information        | Held and shown by IdP.       | Verifiable Presentation, available on the internet, containing Verifiable Credentials issued by any relevant authorities.
| Client ID                 | IdP-assigned. | URL of the Verifiable Presentation.
| Authorization endpoint    | Contains the Identity Provider (IdP)'s hostname. Either static or discovered through OIDC Discovery. | Optional use of a custom scheme (`didconnect:`).
| Token endpoint            | Contains the Identity Provider (IdP)'s hostname. Either static or discovered through OIDC Discovery. | Optional discovery as a `token_uri` parameter in the authorization response. (**WIP**.)
| Userinfo endpoint         | Managed by IdP. Either static or discovered through OIDC Discovery.   | Contained in `id_token` (`userinfo` claim).
| id_token signing key      | Static, with optional OIDC Discovery. | Checked against DID Document (DDO).
| redirect_uri endpoints    | Registered and checked by the IdP. | Listed as a claim in the Client ID's Verifiable Presentation.

## General flow

The OIDC specification defines the following general flow:

1. Client registers (once).
2. Client presents an authentication request in the form of a URL pointing to the Authorization Server (AS).
3. AS authenticates the Resource Owner (for example, if the AS is a mobile app, the user should unlock the app) and asks for consent.
4. Depending on the value of `response_type`, AS generates a combination of identity token, grant code, and/or access token, then provides them to the client's `redirect_uri` contained in the request, following the `response_mode` parameter (form, post or fragment).
5. The client receives the tokens and/or code.
6. *Authorization flow only.* Client gets the URL of the token endpoint and uses it to request the `id_token` and/or `access_token`.
7. Client checks the signature of `id_token` as a JWT and reads user's identity from the token.
8. If a `userinfo` claim is available in `id_token` and an `access_token` was provided, client queries that endpoint, using the access token for authentication.

Specificities on how those steps are to be applied for DIDConnect are detailed in the following sections.

### 1. Client registration

1. Relying Party obtains a DID.
2. RP obtains Verifiable Credentials whose subject is the RP's DID, and issued by entities trusted by the targeted users. How users should trust the RP's DID and/or credentials is outside the scope of this specification. The credentials should typically claim information about the RP, such as the application's name, originating organization, logo, website, etc, but the semantics of such claims is also outside the scope of this specification.
3. RP obtains a Verifiable Credential whose subject is the RP's DID, and containing the claim `redirect_uri` with the value of whitelisted callback URL(s). Like the previous point, how the AS should trust that credential is not defined in this document. However, it is recommended that the credential is self-issued, i.e. the issuer is also the RP's DID.
4. RP creates a Verifiable Presentation containing those credentials, and whose holder is the RP's DID.
5. The Verifiable Presentation is available at a location where users will be able to access it. The RP's Client ID is the presentation's URL.

### 2. Authentication request

A DID Connect authentication request is a normal OpenID Connect URL, but with a specific value of `did` for the `scope` parameter. The value for the `client_id` parameter is the URL-encoded VP URL obtained during registration.

### 3. Obtaining user consent from AS

When the Authorization Server receives a request from the application's client_id, it must treat `client_id` as an URL and fetch the Verifiable Presentation (VP) from it. Then, the AS must check the following conditions:

- The VP's proof is valid.
- The VP is within validity date.
- The `redirect_uri` value from the authentication request matches one of the values present in the VP's _valid credentials_.

Then, the AS should ask for user's consent after displaying all relevant claims, based on _valid credentials_.

Note: For `redirect_uri` and displayed claims, **_valid credentials_** are credentials with a valid proof, that are within validity dates, and whose subject ID is the same as the VP's holder.

### 4. Token generation

See OpenID Connect specification. The token must be signed with a key that is listed in the DID document of the subject's DID.

### 5. Getting the tokens and/or authorization code

See OpenID Connect specification.

### 6. Accessing the tokens (if applicable)

See OpenID Connect specification. Token endpoint URI is taken from the `token_uri` parameter contained in the response.

### 7. Verification of user's identity

The RP's endpoint listening on `redirect_uri` receives the same data as defined in OIDC specification.

The JWT contained in the `id_token` is the same as defined in the OIDC specification, with the following differences:

| Parameter | Meaning in DID Connect
|-----------|-----------------------
| `sub`     | The user's DID.
| `iss`| The identifier (resolved from the DID Document) of the public key that is signing the JWT. The key must be valid for that DID and the JWT must be signed by that key.
| `userinfo` | The URL of the Resource Server where a user's Verifiable Presentation is available.

The Relying Party must verify that:

- The key identified in `iss` is an authorized key of the DID value in `sub`, by looking at the DID Document.
- The JWT is signed by that key.

### 8. Accessing the user's protected resources (when applicable)

If an access token was provided, the client can access user's information by querying the URL referenced as `userinfo` in the id_token, and provide the access token as an `Authorization` header, as described in [OpenID Connect specification](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#UserInfoRequest).

The response is a Verifiable Presentation. The presentation must be valid (proof-wise), within validity dates, and the presentation's holder must be the user's authenticated DID.

## Bring your own AS: `didconnect:` custom scheme

In decentralized authentication scenarios, the Relying Party doesn't always know in advance what Authorization Server the user will want to use. Sometimes that AS can even be a special application such as a mobile application, that doesn't have endpoints open on the internet. This is why this specification allows a new custom URI scheme and path: `didconnect://auth`.

### Example

The following example shows a decentralized authentication request URI. The newlines are for legibility only.

```
didconnect://auth?
  client_id=https%3A%2F%2Fexample.com%2Frelyingparty.vp&
  scope=did%20something&
  redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fexample.com%2Flogin&
  state=xxx
```

### Registration of custom scheme by Authorization Server applications

Any application may register itself for the `didconnect:` custom scheme on the Ressource Owner's operating system, so as to be handed future authentication requests.

Below are examples of Authorization Servers and how they typically register.

| AS implementation | Custom scheme registration |
|--|--|
| Mobile or desktop application | Specific to the operating system |
| Web application | Using `registerProtocolHandler()` on the web browser |

## Current limitations

See ["must address" issues](https://github.com/KayTrust/did-connect/labels/must%20address).
